Fusion Energy
For Peace and Sustainable Development

Foreword
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is dedicated to helping all countries benefit from
the peaceful, safe, secure and sustainable use of nuclear science and technology in many fields,
including energy production.
Fusion energy has the potential to become a virtually inexhaustible, safe, environmentally-friendly
and universally-available energy source, capable of meeting global energy requirements.
Fusion energy has existed for billions of years shining benevolently upon the earth but mankind
still has not managed to capture it in a controlled manner. To make fusion energy production a
reality, enormous scientific and technical challenges still need to be overcome. The IAEA is leading
international efforts to coordinate research in fusion technology by involving nuclear physicists,
material scientists, nuclear data specialists, metallurgists, and plasma experts among others.
Since the early days of its inception, in 1957, the IAEA has supported nuclear fusion research. The
IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications and the Department of Nuclear Energy
implement the IAEA’s activities on nuclear fusion, under the guidance of the International Fusion
Research Council, an IAEA advisory body with members from all parts of the world.
Big strides in understanding fusion energy science have been made. But more efforts with increased
global collaboration, greater investment and coordinated research are required to make nuclear
fusion energy production a reality. The IAEA continues to be at the forefront of these international
efforts.

Mikhail Chudakov

Aldo Malavasi

IAEA Deputy Director General and
Head of the Department of Nuclear Energy

IAEA Deputy Director General and Head of the
Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications

1

Clean Energy through Fusion Technology:
A Sun on Earth
A ‘sunny day’ or a ‘sunny smile’ is always welcome by all of us! Apart from
brightening up our days, many of us recognise that the ‘Sun’ is the basis of life on
earth. The incessant emission of energy and light from the Sun with an unending
stock of fuel engenders, without exception, curiosity in thinkers and scientists.
This is what excites global interest in fusion technology.
Fusion energy is attracting a lot of attention as the world’s energy demands keep
multiplying. The excessive dependence on fossil fuels and its impact on climate
change due to carbon emissions are leading policy makers to consider fusion as
a good option to explore.

Meera Venkatesh
Director, Division of Physical
and Chemical Sciences, IAEA
Department of Nuclear Sciences
and Applications

Enhancing clean energy production through
fusion technology
Through extensive exploration using various tools, logical reasoning and ingenuity,
scientists have proven that a seemingly simple combination of the nuclei of two
very light atoms (tritium and deuterium — both heavier isotopes of hydrogen)
spews out enormous amounts of energy. Such fusion of nuclei — or ‘nuclear
fusion’ — has been a topic of great interest and intensive research since the
1920’s.
It is mind-boggling that the deuterium contained in 0.5 litre of ordinary water
can provide enough energy for a single family house in Europe for a year, when
properly fused with tritium in a fusion reactor.
But despite the apparent simplicity, harnessing commercially-viable fusion power
is a very challenging endeavour, although fusion reactions have been successful
during experiments and the technologies are continually evolving to address the
challenges.

The difficulties facing fusion technology
Making commercially-viable fusion power a reality is fraught with serious
technological challenges such as the ability to create an environment similar to
that of the sun. This means reaching temperatures exceeding 100 million degrees
Celsius and confining the fusion fuel to the vessel within the reactor. Additionally,
finding the right material to construct the fusion reactor, and developing the
mechanism that will be used to extract the enormous energy/heat that is emitted,
are among the other major challenges in the quest to produce electricity from
fusion.

2

“Harnessing commercially-viable
fusion power is a very challenging
endeavour, although fusion
reactions have been successful
during experiments and the
technologies are continually
evolving to address the challenges.”

Making progress through international collaboration
To scientists, it was clear from the very beginning that success in using fusion
technology would require international cooperation. At the second UN Conference
on the “Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy” in Geneva in 1958, discussion on
nuclear fusion led to the newly created International Atomic Energy Agency being
entrusted with the responsibility to lead the global collaboration. Five decades
later the IAEA remains the natural home for fostering international collaboration in
fusion research and development (R&D) through facilitating exchange of scientific
and technical information. Supported by the dedicated community of fusion
researchers in the Member States, the Nuclear Fusion Journal was set up in 1960
by the IAEA to disseminate knowledge in this niche area of science. Today the
journal is considered the main source of information about advances in nuclear
fusion.
Since 1961 the IAEA has also been organizing ‘Fusion Energy Conferences’
(initially named Conference on Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion
Research) to enable the dedicated fusion research professionals to periodically
discuss developments and achievements.
An International Fusion Research Council was also established in 1971 to advise
and provide guidelines to the IAEA Secretariat on matters relating to the Fusion
R&D programme.

The signing of the Agreement that
established the ITER Organization.
(Photo: IAEA)

The fusion research community and the IAEA continue interacting closely on the
development and evaluation of fusion-relevant basic data for nuclear, atomic and
molecular interaction processes in fusion.
The Sun.
(Photo: NASA)

IAEA’s role in international fusion endeavours
The impetus for the establishment of the international organization for fusion
energy, ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) in 2006 came
from discussions in IAEA fora that covered several initiatives for collaboration on
an international fusion facility. The IAEA Director General is the depository of the
ITER Agreement.
ITER, under construction in Cadarache, France, is the largest global scientific
collaboration aimed at demonstrating the scientific and technological feasibility
of fusion energy production.
Currently 35 countries are involved in the ITER project. In addition, individual
countries are engaged in research for fusion to become a future source of energy.
There is a growing expectation, especially in the fusion community that ‘fusion
electricity’ would light the bulbs of their homes soon. While science and technology
issues for fusion power are broadly agreed upon, the next steps to upscale the

3

technology to practical use are still some distance away. Here, the IAEA plays a
crucial role in bringing together all the Member States interested in fusion energy
through the demonstration fusion power plant (DEMO) Programme Workshops.
This workshop aimed to help experts define the facilities and activities that can
lead to the resolution of some of the key scientific and technological challenges
to developing a DEMO. Such DEMO would show that controlled nuclear fusion
can generate net electrical power and mark the final step before the construction
of a commercial fusion power plant.
The scientific community recognises that the realisation of fusion power reactors
would be a landmark achievement, taking nuclear science and technology to
another level.

Status of the ITER construction site as
of 2018.
(Photo ITER Organization)

4

Nuclear Fusion: The Key to a Sustainable Planet
Matteo Barbarino, IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
Sehila Gonzalez de Vicente, IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
Danas Ridikas, IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
Providing energy from nuclear fusion is widely regarded as the grand engineering
challenge of the twenty-first century. Many researchers all over the world focus on
ways of producing energy by recreating an artificial star on Earth.

Stars burning hydrogen in a fusion way. Life
on Earth would not be possible without the
nuclear fusion reactions that power our Sun.
(Photo NASA).

5

Unlike fission, where the atom is split to produce energy, in fusion two lighter
nuclei are joined together to make a heavier nucleus, while energy is released.
This is how stars convert tiny amounts of mass into vast amounts of energy (in line
with to Einstein’s famous equation E=mc2). Life on Earth would not be possible
without the nuclear fusion reactions that power our Sun.

Nuclear fusion. Two lighter nuclei are
joined together to make a heavier nucleus,
while energy is released.
(Photo IAEA).

Burning Hydrogen
The most convenient fusion process involves two isotopes of hydrogen:
deuterium (heavy hydrogen) and tritium (super heavy hydrogen). This reaction,
which is also the easiest to perform because it requires the lowest investment in
terms of power supplied, yields a helium nucleus and a neutron, whose energies
can be harvested for powering the reactor and producing electricity, respectively.

Hydrogen atom and its isotopes. The
most convenient fusion process involves
two isotopes of hydrogen deuterium
(heavy hydrogen) and tritium (super heavy
hydrogen).
(Photo IAEA).

6

Tapping the Energy
At the core of the stars, fusion reactions between hydrogen
atoms take place within dense plasma with temperatures
exceeding 10 million °C. Plasma is a “fourth state of
matter” with unique properties, distinct from solids, liquids
and gases. It consists of freely moving charged particles
and is formed at high temperatures when electrons are
stripped from neutral atoms. More than 99 percent of the
universe as we currently understand it exists as plasma,
including interstellar matter, stars and the Sun.
In a controlled nuclear fusion power plant, three
conditions must be fulfilled:
•	 
very high temperature (more than 10 times hotter
than at the centre of the Sun, hence exceeding
100 million °C) to provoke highly energetic collisions
at extreme speed;
•	 sufficient particle density in the plasma – where the
reaction takes place – to increase the probability of
collisions;
•	 sufficient confinement to hold the plasma and allow
the fusion reactions to take place continuously.
The most performing confinement concept to date has
been the tokamak, a doughnut shaped configuration first
invented in the 1950s, which uses powerful magnets to
confine the plasma. However, in recent years there has
been a renewed enthusiasm for stellarators, and the
world’s largest one has been operating in Germany since
2015. The tokamak is better at keeping the plasma hot
while the stellarator is inherently stable and able to operate
the plasma in a steady state. By now, these machines
can provide the essential conditions for fusion, in terms
of both plasma density and the required temperature,
and fusion power can be generated. The missing piece to
producing net power remains better confinement, which
is a measure of how good the magnetic field is at keeping
the plasma energy, for which a bigger reactor is needed.

Illustration by Jacob Escobedo.

7

Wendelstein 7-X
Wendelstein 7-X in Germany is the world’s largest fusion device of the stellarator
type. Its objective is to investigate the suitability of this type for a power plant. As
a result, a record value for stellarators fusion triple product (a plasma's particle
density, energy confinement time, and ion temperature) was achieved in 2018.
Tokamak (left) vs Stellarator (right). The
tokamak is better at keeping the plasma
hot, while the stellarator is inherently
stable and able to operate the plasma in
a steady state.

ITER – the Way to New Energy
ITER will be the largest tokamak ever built, two times bigger than the largest
tokamaks operating today, and it has been designed for demonstrating the
feasibility of fusion energy for peaceful purposes. With ITER construction, the
focus of nuclear fusion science is slowly shifting from pure research to technology,
material science and engineering. It is expected that ITER will start operating in
2025. However, it is important to note that it is not part of ITER’s mission to
convert energy into electricity and transmit it to the electricity grid.

Wendelstein 7-X.
(Photo IPP).

ITER design. This machine has been
designed for demonstrating the feasibility
of fusion energy for peaceful purposes.
(Photo ITER Organization)

8

DEMO – Putting the Power into the Grid
Depiction of a DEMO.
(Photo Eurofusion)

The technological challenges of bringing fusion power to the electricity grid will be
addressed by a demonstration fusion power plant (DEMO)-type reactor. Individual
countries are exploring ways to do this, and the IAEA is providing a platform for
information exchange in order to facilitate research and technology development.
DEMO is the machine that would explore continuous or near-continuous (steadystate) operation, tritium fuel self-sufficiency, and the large-scale production of
energy and its conversion to electricity. This would represent the next stage after
ITER.
China has made significant progress in planning for a device called China Fusion
Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR) that would bridge the gap between ITER
and DEMO. Construction of the CFETR could start in 2020 and be followed by
construction of a DEMO in the 2030s.
The European Union and Japan are jointly building a powerful tokamak called JT60SA in Naka, Japan, as a complement to ITER in the framework of a partnership
called the Broader Approach Activities. In addition to constructing the JT-60SA,
the joint programme consists of two other projects, the Engineering Validation
and Engineering Design Activities for the International Fusion Materials Irradiation
Facility (IFMIF/EVEDA), and the International Fusion Energy Research Centre
(IFERC). This partnership represents a well-integrated approach to support
ITER and to prepare to undertake the engineering design and construction of a
subsequent DEMO.
India has announced plans to begin building a device called SST-2 to develop
components for a DEMO around 2027, and then start construction of a DEMO in
2037.
South Korea initiated a conceptual design study for a K-DEMO in 2012 targeting
the construction by 2037 with potential for electricity generation starting in 2050.
In its first phase (2037-2050), K-DEMO will develop and test components and
then utilize these components in the second phase after 2050 to demonstrate net
electricity generation.

9

Russia plans the development of a fusion-fission hybrid facility called DEMO
Fusion Neutron Source (FNS), a reactor that would harvest the fusion-produced
neutrons to turn uranium into nuclear fuel and destroy radioactive waste. The
DEMO-FNS is planned to be built by 2023, and is part of Russia’s fast-track
strategy to a fusion power plant by 2050.
The United States of America is considering an intermediate step called Fusion
Nuclear Science Facility (FNSF) to be used for the development and testing
of fusion materials and components for a DEMO-type reactor. Plans call for
operation to start after 2030, and construction of a DEMO after 2050.

Fusion as a Sustainable Energy Source
Although much remains to be done to reach commercial electrical power, nuclear
fusion is one of a very few sustainable options to replace fossil fuels as the world's
primary energy source. Fusion fuel – produced from water and lithium – is in
principle so abundant that fusion energy would be inexhaustible and deployable
everywhere on the planet. Hence, fusion could guarantee nearly unlimited energy
and security of supply at no expense to the environment. In addition, fusion
has the potential to be a large baseload source of electricity with a carbon-free
footprint, and with no high level radioactive waste. Finally, fusion is an inherently
safe process that can be stopped at any moment simply by turning the power off.
Fusion power bears the promise of:
•

clean energy production and transmission;

•	 proliferation-resistant fuel cycle that does not generate high level radioactive
waste;
•

power plants with inherently safe technology features;

•

abundant and inexpensive fuel readily available to all nations.

Big strides in understanding fusion energy science have been made, but more
efforts with increased international collaboration, greater investment and
coordinated research are necessary to make nuclear fusion energy production
a reality.

Sustainable Development Goals
7 and 13. Ensure access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all.
Fusion energy can contribute to
improving energy security, redcing
environmental and health impacts,
and mitigating climate change.
(Photo: United Nations)

10

IAEA’s Coordinated Research Projects: Sharing Knowledge
and Training through Global Partnership
Matteo Barbarino, IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
Sehila Gonzalez de Vicente, IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
Danas Ridikas, IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
Building and maintaining partnerships with experts in Member States are key
IAEA activities. Global cooperation is essential for the ultimate success of fusion
energy. Through the framework of its Coordinated Research Projects (CRPs), the
IAEA acts as a communication facilitator by bringing scientists and experts from
many countries together to exchange information, identify critical issues and
transfer specific knowledge for nuclear fusion development projects.
With a long history of working together under IAEA coordination, around 70
Member States are involved in plasma physics and fusion technology. The
cooperation among laboratories and facilities contributes significantly to the
development of fusion research and technology, and the formulation of the
necessary guidelines and related standards. It also provides the groundwork
needed for training the new generation of scientists and engineers in fusion, and
for developing the diagnostics and technology of next step fusion devices such
as ITER and DEMO.

Network of Small and Medium Size
Magnetic Confinement Fusion Devices
An excellent example for this long-lasting partnership is the IAEA CRP on
‘Network of Small and Medium Size Magnetic Confinement Fusion Devices for
Fusion Research’ — a continuation of former highly successful IAEA activities on
small-medium size tokamaks, supported since 2004. Currently, around 40 smallmedium size devices (tokamak and stellarators) are operational in 15 Member
States.

Sustainable Development Goal 17.
Global partnership for sustainable
development. IAEA Member States
share knowledge, technologies and
best practices through Coordinated
Research Projects.
(Photo: United Nations)

Researchers working with the small and medium-size devices are already making
significant contributions toward achieving controlled fusion energy: the potential
impact of tighter collaborations between them are even more significant.
With the next generation of large-scale fusion devices — such as ITER in France
— preparing for action, the laboratories with small and medium-size devices
could help push the research agenda forward. By establishing and sustaining a
network of laboratories that will perform joint and comparative experiments, train

11

Picture of the vessel of a toroidal
magnetic confinement fusion device
– COMPASS tokamak.
(Photo IAEA).

personnel across institutions and Member States, and educate a new generation
of fusion scientists in cutting-edge technologies, this CRP advances fusion
research by building strong ties between research groups and training future
fusion experts.
The specific research objectives of this CRP are to:
•

publish results from coordinated and joint experiments on turbulence and
transport, the role of electric fields, and possible mechanisms of turbulence
self-regulation;

•

develop new computational techniques for modelling plasma processes,
particularly for real time analysis requiring high-data volume processing;

•

develop prototypes and models for new advanced diagnostics;

•

promote mobility and training of fusion researchers.

Small and medium-size fusion
devices can contribute to making
significant improvements towards
the scaling-up to larger fusion
machines.
(Photo IAEA and Eurofusion).

12

Development of Steady-State Compact Fusion
Neutron Sources
Fusion neutron sources have many important practical uses, such as assisting
fission reactions, manufacturing medical isotopes, testing materials and
components for use in future fusion reactors, and facilitating the production of
various isotopes like tritium. All these applications could be improved by achieving
higher Compact Fusion Neutron Sources (CFNS) energy levels.
Earlier projects investigated a wide range of power options for CFNS, and
confirmed that the potential for significantly higher intensities and fluxes is
achievable in the near future.
This CRP aims to demonstrate that even higher ranges of energy for CFNS are
feasible, and to support the transition from conceptual to engineering design
activities for those compact fusion neutron sources that fit within the scope of the
energy levels the project deals with.
The specific research objectives of this CRP are to:
•

produce a detailed and substantiated overview of applications of CFNS with
currently feasible parameters in the fusion and fission areas as well as in any
other potential field;

•

define R&D programmes that can support the transition to engineering design;

•

perform a comprehensive safety analysis for proposed CFNS;

•

obtain results of joint activities on design, simulations, and experiments
pertinent to the development of a scientific and technological basis for CFNS;

•

create simulation and modelling tools;

•

gather input from stakeholders related to design activities for CFNS.

Illustration of a fusion neutron
source based on magnetic mirror –
Gas Dynamic Trap.
(Photo IAEA)

Standardization of Small Specimen Test Techniques
Structural materials development and research on materials suitable for the
extreme conditions in a fusion reactor are needed to achieve safety and efficiency
of future fusion power plants. Fusion materials development will depend on the
progress made in irradiation physics and fusion materials research.
The CRP Towards the Standardization of Small Specimen Test Techniques for
Fusion Applications addresses the issues of limited testing volume with needed
neutron fluxes in accelerator-driven fusion-relevant neutron sources. This CRP
coordinates the production of guidelines based on best practices on main test

13

techniques for reference structural fusion materials (tensile, creep, low cycle
fatigue, fracture toughness, fatigue crack growth rate). These guidelines should
be the first step towards a full standardization of the standard specimen test
techniques.
The specific research objectives of this CRP are to:
•	 
analyse the data available on Small Specimen Test Techniques (SSTT)
focusing on fusion structural reference materials (RAFM steels) and produce a
comprehensive reference database;
•	 establish reference guidelines for tensile tests using small specimens for the
selected materials;
•	 establish reference guidelines for creep tests, low cycle fatigue tests, fracture
toughness tests and fatigue crack growth rate using small specimens for the
selected materials;
•

define meaningful round robin tests for establishing best practices in the field;

•	 
define the SSTT to be used for characterization of irradiate materials in
dedicated fusion neuron sources;
•

establish guidelines for common practice in the use of SSTT.

The Bridge of Knowledge
For the more than 120 IAEA Member States that are not part of the ITER
Organization, the IAEA performs an important bridging function, disseminating
knowledge from ITER to the wider community and vice-versa, providing a platform
for both the scaling up to larger fusion machines and for exchange between ITER
and the rest of the world.

ITER made of Lego.
(Photo Sculpture by Sachiko Akinaga;
photograph by Hironobu Maeda).

14

The Challenges of Controlled Nuclear Fusion
Christian Hill, IAEA Department of Nuclear Sciences and Applications
The development of commercially-viable fusion power faces serious technological
challenges, the most challenging of which are:
•	 achieving and sustaining temperatures in excess of 100 million °C, whilst
confining the hot fusion plasma to the reactor vessel;
•

finding the right material from which to construct the fusion reactor vessel;

•	 developing the technology to breed the tritium component of the fusion fuel
from the neutrons released in an ongoing reaction; and
•	 designing the mechanism that will be used to extract the enormous amount of
energy that is produced and convert it to electricity.

Plasma Confinement
In a fusion process, the high-temperature plasma must be confined for long
enough for the fuel nuclei to combine. In the Sun, the pressure caused by the
hydrogen fusion is balanced by the inward-acting force of gravity to keep the
solar core in equilibrium, but this force is far too weak to provide the necessary
confinement on the scale of an Earth-based reactor. Instead, most concepts
for fusion reactors are based on magnetic confinement: since the nuclei and
electrons are charged, they can be deflected by a magnetic field. In the most
common design of magnetic confinement device, the tokamak, magnetic fields
are used to drive the plasma around a torus-shaped reaction chamber and keep
it from getting too close to the reactor’s “first wall” which they would otherwise
damage.

The ITER Tokamak will rely on three
sources of external heating to bring
the plasma to the temperature
necessary for fusion: neutral beam
injection and two sources of highfrequency electromagnetic waves
(ion and electron cyclotron heating).
(Photo: ITER Organization)

However, the plasma confinement is never perfect and periodically instabilities
arise, which send plumes of hot plasma into the reactor wall, reducing its lifetime.
Research is ongoing to better understand, model and mitigate these instabilities:
the reactor components must survive long enough before they need to be
replaced for the reactor to produce energy on a commercial basis.
A further concern is the construction and operation of the large, superconducting
electromagnets required to create the magnetic fields. These are expensive,
heavy and consume a large amount of energy themselves. They operate only
at very low temperatures (-270 °C, just 4°C above absolute zero), but in close
proximity to the hot plasma (>100 million °C), which creates the largest known
temperature gradient in the entire universe.

15

Heating and Fuelling the Plasma
Before fusion can occur, a stable, high-temperature plasma of deuterium and
tritium must be created. The magnetic field driving the plasma particles in a
current around a tokamak creates some of this heating through (non-fusion)
collisions but to reach the very highest temperatures required additional heating
is necessary. This is provided through high-frequency electromagnetic radiation
(analogous to the heating brought about in a microwave) and through neutralbeam injection: a high-speed beam of particles (which must be uncharged to
penetrate the magnetic field) is fired into the plasma where it transfers its energy
through collisions.
Alongside the processes which heat the plasma, impurities can lead to it cooling
through unwanted collisions and the emission of light.
The deuterium-tritium fusion process requires tritium as a component of its fuel.
Tritium is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen with a half-life of 12.3 years and
does not occur naturally in any significant quantities. However, it can be formed
(“bred”) in a nuclear reaction by neutron activation of 6Li, an isotope of lithium:
Li + 1n → 3T + 4He

6

The proposed approach is to surround the reactor with a “blanket” of a lithiumcontaining material which would slow down and capture some of the neutrons
produced by the fusion reaction to breed the tritium fuel. The 6Li reaction also
releases energy and so can contribute to the reactor’s power output.

Reactor Materials
The development of suitable materials from which a nuclear fusion reactor can be
constructed is the subject of ongoing research. Such materials should have the
following properties for a reactor to be viable:
•	 a high melting point and conductivity, and resilience with respect to damage
through exposure to the high-energy plasma particles;
•	 
a low propensity to become activated (become radioactive) through
bombardment by the high-energy neutrons produced by the fusion reaction;
•	 a low tendency to absorb tritium: as well as reducing the amount available as
fuel, the retention of tritium creates radioactive waste, which would require
special handling when decommissioning the reactor material.
The last property all but rules out the use of carbon-based materials as a plasmafacing component. ITER will use a beryllium and tungsten; it is anticipated that
DEMO will employ “reduced-activation steel” and tungsten.

16

The IAEA’s Atomic and Molecular Data (AMD) Unit:
Activities in Support of Fusion
The AMD Unit helps address the challenges of developing controlled nuclear
fusion by:
•

providing a trusted and permanent repository of fundamental data;

•	 bringing together experts to evaluate such data and carry out research through
the IAEA’s Coordinated Research Project (CRP) programme;
•	 providing a platform on which non-experts can become involved in research
and data analysis through crowdsourcing activities.
Some of the activities in support of fusion over the last 10 years are described
below.

The Characterization of Size, Composition and Origins of Dust in Fusion
Devices
Depending on the material used in their plasma-facing components, tokamaks
can produce a significant amount of dust from erosion of the reactor components.
This dust can retain tritium, lead to impurities in the fusion plasma and create a
health hazard for workers exposed to it during reactor maintenance. This CRP
addressed the data needs relating to such dust and created a database of dust
properties for regulatory and other analysis.

Fundamental Data for Modelling Collisional Processes Involving Isotopes of
Hydrogen and Helium in Fusion Plasmas
These species are the principal components of a fusion plasma, and, away from
the core plasma where the temperature is lower, they exist in many different
excited atomic and molecular states which are interchanged through collisions.
This CRP provided evaluated data to better model the physics of these collisional
processes and provide input for tokamak design and operation.

CRPs on plasma-wall interactions
Beryllium, tungsten and steel are all candidate materials for plasma-facing
components in experimental fusion reactors. However, too little is known about
their behaviour under the extreme conditions they are exposed to. The following
projects coordinated international experimental and theoretical research into the
properties of these materials:

17

Data for Erosion and Tritium Retention in Beryllium Plasma-Facing Materials
Beryllium is an attractive material to use in experimental reactors as it conducts
heat well, does not create much dust or cool the plasma much when it acts as
an impurity and does not become radioactive through interactions with neutrons.
The JET and ITER tokamaks use beryllium as the major component of their first
reactor walls. This CRP provided evaluated data on the interactions of beryllium
with plasma particles to further assess its suitability and inform the simulation of
these and other tokamaks.
Plasma-Wall Interaction with Irradiated Tungsten and Tungsten Alloys in
Fusion Devices
Tungsten is another widely-used material in tokamaks, used in the divertor
component of JET and ITER, which is exposed to some of the highest heat loads
in the reactor. This CRP brought together over 20 research groups from around the
world to coordinate research into how the properties of tungsten are altered in the
intense radiation environment of a fusion reactor. For example, pure, undamaged
tungsten has little tendency to absorb hydrogen (and hence the tritium fuel of
the fusion reaction), but bombardment by neutrons and other energetic particles
creates cracks, bubbles and voids that increase its propensity to do so. This
behaviour must be understood to make confident predictions about the suitability
of tungsten in a future commercial reactor.
Plasma-wall Interaction with Reduced-activation Steel Surfaces in Fusion
Devices
Steel is considered to be a candidate plasma-facing material for the planned
DEMO Demonstration Power Station which, it is proposed, will follow ITER as a
prototype commercial fusion power plant. Steel does not cool the fusion plasma
as much as tungsten when it acts as an impurity and is less toxic and less prone
to erosion than beryllium. However, its composition must be carefully controlled to
exclude nuclei which become radioactive under exposure to the fusion neutrons.
This ongoing CRP brings together experts to compare different candidate steels
under suitably-chosen conditions with respect to their resistance to erosion and
hydrogen retention.
Data for Atomic Processes of Neutral Beams in Fusion Plasma
As described above, neutral beam injection is a method for heating and providing
diagnostics on fusion plasmas in tokamaks. This ongoing CRP brings together
experts in fundamental atomic data with modellers of neutral beam physics
to validate their simulation codes and fill gaps in the community’s necessary

18

Carbon composites, beryllium
and tungsten are considered as
candidate materials for next step
fusion devices.
(Photo: ITER Organization)

knowledge base. This will help researchers to better understand the
collisional processes involved and thereby improve the technology
and accuracy of data analysis.
Databases and Data Evaluation
The AMD Unit is responsible for the long-term management of several
databases of fundamental atomic and molecular properties, including
ALADDIN (a searchable repository of evaluated collisional data for
fusion-relevant processes), and AMBDAS (a bibliographic database);
both are widely used in the research community and recognised for
their permanence, authority and accessibility.
The Unit’s databases are continuously improved and expanded
through Technical Meetings on specific data needs of the fusion
community, the quantification and implication of uncertainties in data
and on techniques for data validation, curation and dissemination.
Crowdsourcing “Challenges”
The Unit has recently run a successful crowdsourcing “challenge”
project inviting non-specialist data scientists to analyse simulations of
neutron radiation damage in materials for fusion reactors in order to
better understand, classify and predict their behaviour. Since, with rare
exceptions, it is prohibitively expensive to conduct actual experiments
on the irradiation of materials by high-energy neutrons, researchers
have developed virtual, computer-based “molecular dynamics”
simulations of the processes that occur following the impact of a
neutron on an atom in a solid crystal. The energy of a single fusion
neutron is so great that the material locally melts and then resolidifies,
leaving many atoms displaced from their original locations. This results
in material damage, including dislocations and clusters of vacancies
and interstitial atoms in the initially perfect crystal lattice. Such damage
needs to be understood, since it weakens the material and increases
its propensity to absorb the valuable tritium fuel.

A visualization of the “collisional
cascade” resulting from the impact
of a high-energy neutron on an
atom of tungsten in a crystal.
(Photo: Andrea Sand, University of Helsinki)

The computer simulations can be run repeatedly for different materials,
and impact energies and directions, yielding a large number of virtual
crystal configurations. The challenge set to subscribers to this
exercise was to produce software that analyses these configurations
to identify and visualise their important features. In this way, the
algorithms produced will help identify candidate materials with the
desired properties for use in an economically-viable nuclear fusion
power reactor.

19

Widening Awareness of Fusion Science and Technology:
IAEA Publications
Sophia Le Masurier, IAEA Division of Conference and Document Services
The IAEA’s publishing activities have played a significant role in the dissemination
of information to its Member States. The first technical books were issued in
1958 and, since then, the IAEA has established itself as a leading publisher in the
nuclear field. It now publishes over 100 titles annually, ranging from case studies
to international safety standards.
In the area of fusion, and in tandem with the IAEA’s technical activities, the
publishing activities have supported Member States engaged in the field of
plasma physics and fusion technology in the following ways: dissemination of
research results; assistance and information provision to researchers; facilitation
of international collaborative activities such as ITER; documentation arising from
technical meetings, workshops and conferences; and the provision of educational
resources, including textbooks and training courses. The publications offer an
unbiased and authoritative source of information. They are driven by developments
in the field and by the changing needs of Member States.

Dissemination of Research
Nuclear Fusion
One of the most important contributions that the IAEA’s publishing activities make
in support of fusion research is the provision of a high quality, peer reviewed
forum. The journal Nuclear Fusion was launched in 1960. It is now the most
frequently cited journal in the field. Nuclear Fusion is steered by an international
board of eminent scientists, who give direction on content and policy. It facilitates
communication between research groups worldwide, disseminating results and
concepts and aiding collaboration. The journal now regularly receives submissions
from over 30 countries and its geographical balance reflects the significant body
of work being done globally in fusion. Every major advance in fusion has been
reflected in the journal’s published articles.

Conference material
The IAEA has an active programme of conferences the results of which are
captured in published proceedings, summary reports or in online collections.

20

Papers from the flagship biennial IAEA Fusion Energy Conference have been
published in various forms, and create an ongoing record of research progress.
Currently, the overview papers from this conference are collected in a special
issue of the journal, Nuclear Fusion. Many of the contributed papers are also
submitted to the journal for publication, and are indexed accordingly.

Coordinated research projects and workshops
The results of IAEA coordinated research projects and other technical activities
are presented in a variety of IAEA publications. These would include the Atomic
and Plasma–Material Interaction Data publications and in the IAEA Technical
Reports Series and Technical Document (TECDOC) Series.

Education
The IAEA has always assisted Member States’ efforts in the arena of education,
knowledge sharing and training by providing appropriate materials for researchers,
students and educators. It has ensured the involvement of leading individuals
in fusion and facilitated knowledge transfer. Published in 2012, the 1200 page
graduate text, Fusion Physics, with its broad coverage of fusion topics, is an
example.

International Collaboration
Arguably, the most strategic contribution of IAEA publications in fusion has
been in support of large international projects. The global collaboration in fusion
that became ITER was preceded by the experimental power reactor study,
International Tokamak Reactor (INTOR), which had been pursued under the
auspices of the IAEA. The IAEA published a series of publications arising from the

21

INTOR workshops. The IAEA has supported the ITER endeavour from its inception
and through its founding as an independent international organization; and as
part of this support has published a number of ITER-related publications. The
importance of publications to the enterprise is indicated by the 2008 cooperation
agreement between the two organizations which makes specific reference to,
among other things, cooperation on publications.
Looking to the future, the IAEA will facilitate knowledge dissemination in relation
to demonstration fusion power plants (DEMO) and beyond.

Responsive to Changing Requirements
The IAEA endeavours to ensure that its information provision is agile and highly
responsive to the evolving needs of the user communities. The topicality of the
publications in fusion complements on-going activities worldwide. For example,
the scope of research papers published in the IAEA journal Nuclear Fusion has
changed over time. Earlier articles concentrated on plasma physics and the
necessary conditions for fusion. Later, discussion on engineering issues, machine
concepts and the results from an increasing number of machines were published.
Another example would be that throughout the years, IAEA activities, which
result in special journal issues, proceedings volumes and technical reports, have
always addressed issues of contemporary research interest. Current concerns
on fusion materials, safety and technology have therefore resulted in various
IAEA publications, such as TECDOC-1829 Investigations of Materials under High
Repetition and Intense Fusion Pulses, and TECDOC Integrated Approach to
Safety Classification of Mechanical Components for Fusion Applications.

Impact
Whilst the impact of the IAEA’s contribution to knowledge dissemination through
its fusion publications is difficult to quantify, measures such as the number of
citations and the traffic to the online publications give an indication of worth and
utility. There were nearly half a million downloads of Nuclear Fusion articles in
2017, and according to the 2017 Journal Citation Reports®, the journal achieved
an impact factor of over 4 (the highest in the field). The book, Fusion Physics,
remains among the most popular online IAEA books, accessed over 20000 times
since its publication.
Through its publications, the IAEA provides continuity and an unbiased,
international forum. With its close links with the fusion community, it ensures
relevance and topicality of information.

22

Fusion Portal
For further information regarding the IAEA fusion activities and to access all the
news and publications, please visit the IAEA Fusion Portal:
https://nucleus.iaea.org/sites/fusionportal.

Recent Publications
WU, Y., CHEN, Z., MENG, Z., HU, L., GONZALEZ DE VICENTE, S.M., MERRILL, B., PANAYOTOV, D., ZUCCHETTI,
M., KOLBASOV, B., VAN HOUTTE, D., BUSTREO, C., KIM, Y., SAKAMOTO, Y., KIM, K., MAISONNIER, D., CLARK, D.,
KALASHNIKOV, A., SUBBOTIN, M., Summary of the 2nd International Workshop on Environmental, Safety and Economic
Aspects of Fusion Power, Nucl. Fusion 58 (2018) 097001,
http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1741-4326/aacaad
GONZALEZ DE VICENTE, S.M., PRINJA, N., GAGLIARDI, M., LA ROVERE, S., PERRAULT, D., TAYLOR, N., Safety
classification of mechanical components for fusion application, Fusion Eng. and Design (2018), available online:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fusengdes.2018.04.108
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Integrated Approach to Safety Classification of Mechanical Components
for Fusion Applications, IAEA-TECDOC accepted for publication, IAEA, Vienna (2018).
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Investigations of Materials under High Repetition and Intense Fusion
Pulses, IAEA-TECDOC-1829, IAEA, Vienna (2017),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/IAEABooks/11094/Investigations-of-Materials-under-High-Repetition-and-IntenseFusion-Pulses
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Atomic and Plasma–Material Interaction Data Volume 17, IAEA, Vienna
(2017),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/IAEABooks/12222/Atomic-and-Plasma-Material-Interaction-Data-Volume-17
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Utilization of a Network of Small Magnetic Confinement Fusion Devices for
Mainstream Fusion Research, IAEA-TECDOC-1807, IAEA, Vienna (2016),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/iaeabooks/11144/Utilization-of-a-Network-of-Small-Magnetic-Confinement-FusionDevices-for-Mainstream-Fusion-Research
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Fusion Energy: The Role of the IAEA, Information Booklet, IAEA, Vienna
(2015),
https://nucleus.iaea.org/sites/fusionportal/SiteCollectionDocuments/fusionbrochure_02.pdf

23

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Atomic and Plasma–Material Interaction Data Volume 16, IAEA, Vienna
(2014),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/IAEABooks/8475/Atomic-and-Plasma-Material-Interaction-Data-for-Fusion
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Applications of Research Reactors towards Research on Materials for
Nuclear Fusion Technology, IAEA-TECDOC-1724, IAEA, Vienna (2013),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/IAEABooks/10574/Applications-of-Research-Reactors-towards-Research-onMaterials-for-Nuclear-Fusion-Technology.
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Integrated Approach to Dense Magnetized Plasmas Applications in Nuclear
Fusion Technology, IAEA-TECDOC-1708, IAEA, Vienna (2013),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/iaeabooks/10452/Integrated-Approach-to-Dense-Magnetized-Plasmas-Applicationsin-Nuclear-Fusion-Technology
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Pathways to Energy from Inertial Fusion: An Integrated Approach, IAEATECDOC-1704, IAEA, Vienna (2013),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/iaeabooks/10379/Pathways-to-Energy-from-Inertial-Fusion-An-Integrated-Approach
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dense Magnetized Plasmas, IAEA-TECDOC-1699, IAEA, Vienna (2013),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/iaeabooks/10373/Dense-Magnetized-Plasmas
KIKUCHI, M., LACKNER, K., TRAN, M.Q. (Eds), Fusion Physics, IAEA, Vienna (2012),
https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/iaeabooks/8879/Fusion-Physics

24

Please visit our newly redesigned

Fusion Portal

https://nucleus.iaea.org/sites/fusionportal

18-03925E

